Crafting Creativity in Digital Humanities: The Joys of Empowering Makers to Transform Communities
=================================================================================================

One of the core pedagogical aims of my scholarly persona, the “makeademic,” is to empower people to reenvision themselves as makers. A particularly valuable aspect of the maker identity is that it is much less daunting than asking someone to call themselves an artist, designer, craftsperson, or artisan. Those identities feel reserved for professionals, and there is an emphasis on expertly creating a final polished product (the artwork, the design, the craft, the handiwork) that has no direct equivalence for the maker (perhaps closest is the artifact?). The democratization of the maker subculture is rooted in the well-established DIY ethos from the 70s punk scene while expanding at the beginning of the 21st century with the increased availability of emerging technologies. Two key factors to the maker movement’s success were 1) the establishment of makerspaces as sites for collaborating and sharing resources, and 2) the widespread support of open-source principles that reduced barriers to entry. These core tenets coincide with Lisa Spiro’s proposed values for digital humanities (an interdisciplinary academic umbrella term for humanistic inquiry that thoughtfully engages with/and incorporates technology): 1) openness, 2) collaboration, 3) collegiality and connectedness, 4) diversity, and 5) experimentation (Spiro 2012). 

David Staley posed the question: “Now that the maker movement has come to the humanities, and digital fabrication tools and computer numerical control (CNC) machines are potential parts of the humanist’s tool kit, what sorts of things will humanists make?” (Staley 2016, 32). At the intersection of making and digital humanities is critical making, “a mode of materially productive engagement that is intended to bridge the gap between creative physical and conceptual exploration” (Ratto 2011, 252). So how does research through making show up in DH scholarship, classroom, communities, and how does making highlight the relationship we have with our communities? This article will first review collaborative critical making DH scholarship, then explore how DH educators are incorporating “learning by making” in their classrooms and beyond, and finally highlight how making can build and transform communities.


# DH Collaborative Research through Critical Making

While some traditional humanities departments may still hail the lone genius, digital humanities rejects this myth in favor of highly collaborative, interdisciplinary project teams. What follows will by no means be a comprehensive overview, but rather a sampler of some noteworthy DH projects incorporating material maker technologies like physical computing and digital fabrication to serve as inspiration. 

…

# Educating and Empowering Makers

The collaborative projects from the previous section showcase how material making can enhance humanistic inquiry, but how do those skills get built in the first place? While some DH scholars may have backgrounds in engineering, design, and fine arts, we cannot assume that every humanist can jump into a maker project. Therefore, it is necessary for many educators in traditional classrooms as well as extracurricular programming to teach these skills in an accessible manner. In this section, I will feature some of the learning by making approaches that have inspired my own teaching, as well as share from the workshops I have taught as an alt-ac DH professional.

## Undergraduate Classrooms
In the article “Bibliocircuitry and the Design of the Alien Everyday” collaboratively authored by professor Kari Kraus and several of her students, the authors … "physical books as platforms for experimenting with computation.“ (Hancock 2013, 78)

Professor Maggie Melo, inspired by bibliocircuitry, taught her students …

Quinn Daedal’s Textile Makerspace (Data Visualization with Textiles) … 

In my own prior course, Interactive Methods: Magic Books as a digital culture and design assistant professor at Coastal Carolina University, I taught students how to 

## Library Workshops
Located in the Kislak Center for Special Collections, Rare Books and Manuscripts, the Vitale Lab for Book History and Digital Humanities is a book lab with a text technologies petting zoo, a Book Beetle desktop printing press, microscope and document cameras, zines and ephemera hung with colorful clothespins, and a small reference library. This space is directed by Dot Porter, Curator of Digital Humanities in the Schoenberg Institute for Manuscript Studies, and Whitney Trettien, Faculty Director of the Price Lab for Digital Humanities. The lab is uniquely situated in the library with access to rare book materials for visualization but also serves as a makerspace with tools and materials for making prints, zines, buttons, and other paper crafts. While we call this space a lab, it might alternatively be identified as a feminist hackerspace; “This merging of hackerspace activities with traditionally feminized forms of craft-based practices destabilizes dominant categories of technical work to recognize the technical practices that are already taking place” (Burek et al 2017, 226-227). 

Dot Porter invited me and Christine Kemp, Program Coordinator of Technology and Play, to collaborate with her Reimagining Illumination workshop series, where participants learned how to create illuminated initials with gold leaf, paint 3D-printed replicas of manuscript marginalia characters, cut and paste replica manuscript collages, etc. As a longtime fan of high-low tech and former design team member of Chibitronics, I wanted to design a workshop introducing people to the magic of combining paper with electronics. I designed a template to create mini light-up constellation shadow boxes. This activity teaches the fundamentals of creating a parallel electrical circuit with a coin cell battery, conductive fabric tape, and circuit stickers with built in surface mount LEDs and resistors. The frame was cut and folded from a template printed on holographic cardstock and the historical constellation artwork was laser printed and foil laminated. While this is a simple “craft”, it is an important building block to more advanced projects, such as interactive installations (https://chibitronics.com/gallery/) or light-up data visualizations (https://wonderfulidea.co/blog/2018/4/9/mapping-data-visualization-and-paper-circuits) 

These workshops required advanced registration but were open to the public and attracted a diverse array of makers including graduate students from education, academic staff from departments across campus, nurses from the university hospital, and retirees from the local Philadelphia area. Several participants enjoyed the first workshop so much, they became regulars in the series, and it created a delightful community where people shared the creative projects that they were working on outside of the workshop, or they came back to tell us how their friends and family members had been impressed by the crafts they brought home. Much of the informal feedback we received specifically mentioned how great it was to take a mental break from their typical workday and revive their creativity. Much like feminist hackerspaces, “the goal is to have ‘a space where you can come into your own but also watch other people learn and grow’” (Burek et al 2017, 225).

## DH Training Institutes
Because digital humanities is such an interdisciplinary field, it is impossible for any one institution to offer comprehensive training. In 2001, the Digital Humanities Summer Institute was founded as a way for digital humanists at all stages of their career to enhance their skills and create networking opportunities for collaboration. The summer institute was hosted at the University of Victoria from 2004 to 2024. Meanwhile, in 2013 the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities started a Digital Humanities Winter Institute, which spun into subsequent years as HILT, the Humanities Intensive Learning and Training Institute, which travelled across host institutions, including 2018 at the University of Pennsylvania. From there and then, the Price Lab for Digital Humanities at the University of Pennsylvania started offering Dream Lab as a low-cost East Coast digital humanities summer training alternative for graduate students and early career DH professionals.

From 2013-2016, members of the Maker Lab @UVic taught the Physical Computing and Desktop Fabrication course, which I had the privilege of taking as a graduate student in 2016. https://github.com/uvicmakerlab/dhsi2016/blob/master/index.md Ten years after I was a student in my first summer DH training course, it was exciting to design my own Dream Lab course. Inspired by the recent trends in the #DHMakes community and Kari Kraus’ “The Care of Enchanted Things” in Debates in the Digital Humanities 2019, I titled my course “Critical Making: Enchanted Things.”

“Enchanted things refers to hybrid physical-digital objects in the real world whose seemingly magical properties imbue them with the aura of enchantment.” – Kari Kraus
This hands-on course offers an introduction to critical making (thinking through prototyping) in digital humanities. The goal of this course is to gain practical takeaways that can be used in research and pedagogy. We will explore a variety of analog and digital technologies including but not limited to letterpress and bookmaking, 3D scanning and printing, vinyl and laser cutters, physical computing and paper circuits. At the end of the week, participants will use the technologies available to create enchanted things.

In the true collaborative spirit of digital humanities, this course was co-created and co-taught by my amazing colleagues across campus. I approached all of them with general ideas of how we might learn from their spaces, and each offered their time, resources, and expertise to help create a better project that participants would enjoy. They each welcomed us into the space, contextualizing their work, and let us engage in playful experimentation, and I am eternally grateful.

### Unit 1: Paper Circuits
In our first unit, I introduced participants to the Vitale Lab for Book History and Digital Humanities and presented on enchanted things, #DHMakes, and data physicalization. We then started our paper circuit activity, a modified version of the Chibitronics Silhouettes Lesson (p. 45) https://chibitronics.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/Chibitronics-Educators-Guide-1.pdf. Participants drew a design on the front of their card, then traced their circuit with conductive fabric tape on the inside to connect the negative side of the coin cell battery to the negative leg (anode) of the LED and the positive side of the battery to the positive leg (cathode) of the LED with a break for a switch. Participants then wrote a message using Sharpie on a piece of vellum paper and used double-sided tape to attach it to the back side of the front of the card. As an enchanted thing, when the switch was pressed, the light would turn on, revealing the hidden message strategically placed in the design of the card.

### Unit 2: Laser Cutters
In our second unit, Taylor Caputo, Director of the Engineering Studios @ Venture Lab (https://venturelab.upenn.edu/engineering-studios) gave us a safety tour of the space, which included 3D printers, laser-cutters, rotary saws, a spray booth, and a fume hood. She then presented on ways that the space has been utilized, including her popular How To Make Things course, https://penntoday.upenn.edu/news/sewing-3d-printing-taylor-caputo-and-engineering-studios-penns-venture-lab and taught us about how to prepare files for laser cutters to either vector or raster etch or vector cut and how to optimize settings for speed and desired look. She then started our laser-cutting project by directing us to create an illustration on a template. The Studio Technicians then took a photo to convert to a digital file, and within a few hours, we had our illustrations raster etched and cut out of clear acrylic. As an enchanted thing, when the acrylic is placed on an LED base, it creates an edge-lit acrylic lamp where the color of the light appears only at the etched design.

### Unit 3: Prototyping with Cardboard
In our third unit, Taylor Caputo introduced us to a wonderful prototyping tool, the ChompSaw, which was invented by her former students from her Integrated Product Development class (and was developed as a very successful Kickstarter project). It is a safety power tool for children and adults alike to create low-fidelity prototypes with cardboard. Taylor prepared pieces of cardboard with printed templates glued to them, and from there we used the ChompSaws to cut out pieces of the pattern and use hot glue to attach them. As an enchanted thing, when we assembled the pieces, we had cardboard puppets that we brought to life with accessories.

### Unit 4: Physical Computing with Arduino
In our fourth unit, I introduced participants to the open-source community Arduino with the Grove Beginner Kit for Arduino https://www.digikey.com/en/products/detail/seeed-technology-co-ltd/110061162/12093286 . This kit contains a Seeeduino Lotus microcontroller with breakaway sensors and actuators and is accompanied by extensive online documentation https://wiki.seeedstudio.com/Grove-Beginner-Kit-For-Arduino/ . We followed the first five lessons to get used to reading and writing code, verifying and uploading code to the board, and understanding sensors (input) and actuators (output). As an enchanted thing, we created an eerie pseudo-theremin concert by everyone adjusting the values in their code to play a different range of Hertz values on their piezo buzzer based on the amount of input coming in from the photocell (light sensor). https://app.arduino.cc/sketches/29661918-eca8-4f81-a2a7-b5fe93844d4e?view-mode=embed 

### Unit 5: 3D Scanning Bookbindings
In our fifth unit, Dot Porter showcased two recent acquisitions, Sentiments and Similes of William Shakespeare and Parables of Our Lord by historic maker, Henry Noels Humphreys, which both have exquisite chromolithographic illuminations inside and ornate papier-mâché bindings on the outside. Kathryn Reuter, Fine Arts Librarian, then introduced us to best methods for 3D scanning with the Artec Spider and participants had the opportunity to practice the art of capturing volumetric data. As an enchanted thing, we took inspiration of this genre of gift books, and applied it to our next unit on 3D printing.

### Unit 6: 3D Printing and NFCs
In our sixth unit, Tex Kang and Christine Kemp, Program Coordinators for Technology and Play at Education Commons introduced us to their makerspace filled with 3D printers, CNC vinyl cutters, physical computing components, an embroidery machine, some metalsmithing tools. In advance of the workshop, Tex Kang 3D-printed each participant a living hinge tome keychain that can open and snap close. He explained how he was able to pause the print partway to switch from the colored filament to the white filament. The first component to the enchanted thing was using a holographic build plate to mimic the mother-of-pearl sheen found on many papier-mâché gift books. In the second component to the enchanted thing, Tex Kang taught participants how to program small NFC stickers to direct to a URL using a mobile app. We then embedded the NFCs in our book keychains and they served as quick and portable links to academic webpages.

### Unit 7: Anaglyph Letterpress
In our seventh unit, Jessica Peterson, Common Press Manager introduced us to her letterpress studio, which has a 19th century handpress, a platen press, and two Vandercook cylinder presses, as well as many drawers of metal and wood type. Jessica Peterson presented on the history of typography and letterpress as well as her collaborations with historians on re-creating the printed Declaration of Independence. This activity was inspired by the anaglyph letterpress workshop offered by Kadin Henningsen, Head of the King Library Press at the University of Kentucky, and he generously shared his experimentation to find the perfect Pantone color (319) for the cyan. Jessica Peterson mixed the ink, and each participant learned how to typeset their own word out of wood type and create a lockup. We then used brayers to directly apply the cyan ink to the type, register and print the text on cover paper, clean off the ink, offset the paper, and reprint the word again in red ink. As an enchanted thing, the resulting red-cyan offset word when viewed with 3D glasses appears to float in front of the paper. 

### Unit 8: Vector Design, Vinyl Cutting, and Screenprinting
In our eighth unit, I introduced participants to an iterative process for creating screenprints from digital designs. First, participants had to get comfortable with designing vector graphics on their computers. Then I led them through the process of mirroring their designs and cutting them out of vinyl with the Silhouette Cameo hobby CNC cutter. Participants then painstakingly removed the positive elements of their design, leaving behind the negative to transfer to silkscreen using transfer tape. Once their screens were prepared, participants helped each other use squeegees to pull screenprinting ink across their screens with cardstock or fabric below. As an enchanted thing, participants had the option to use a phantom clear ink which dries clear and hydrophopic, so the message is only revealed when the design is exposed to water.

### Reflections/ Show-and-Tell
The best part about Dream Lab is the community created. I am so grateful I had the opportunity to collaborate with so many brilliant people including independent scholars, graduate students, academic staff, librarians, and faculty. In advance of the course, I sent out an email with a packing list, a to-do list, recommended reading, and the course mindset: “Mistakes are portals of discovery. Take chances, make mistakes, get messy!” Much like the #DHMakes communities #DHTries and JITP’s Teaching Fails, I think it’s important to recognize how much more learning happens when things are not perfect. I am particularly grateful that every single participant approached the course with curiosity, creativity, patience, and overall good vibes. When the screenprinting activity ended up taking too long and getting pushed from Thursday to Friday, participants were open-minded, and though they only had an hour and a half solely dedicated to individual projects on Friday, they ended up creating incredibly impressive projects through tinkering and a DIY attitude. For example, one participant combined two inverted edge-lit acrylic lamps to create a multi-color light sculpture based on historical scientific illustrations. Another participant created an interactive art installation of everyday objects with hidden NFC tags. Another participant created a bibliocircuitry project based on a historic cookbook from their collection, programming text to scroll across an OLED screen and an LED to flicker. My hope is that by sampling beginner projects with a range of technologies, everyone was able to take away at least one maker activity that they could bring back to their own research and pedagogy and know how to pursue additional resources to become more advanced.
